## Setup

I have done a lot of work over the past two years to gain a deep understanding of my families finances. With the ultimate goal of building a very accurate monthly budget. 

Having a very accurate monthly budget is one of the first steps you need to accomplish to gain control over your finances.

To build an accurate budget you need data. As much data as you can get your hands on. One of the best ways for getting this data is to start tracking & categorizing your expenses.

When I bought my first house I started tracking housing expenses and have diligently tracked this information since August of 2018. So when it comes to housing expenses I have a very strong understanding of how much should be budgeted for the housing categories. To be more specific I track:

- mortgage (includes insurance and tax)
- electric
- gas
- sewer
- water
- trash
- internet

I have been tracking additional expenses since mid February of 2021 to start gathering data around the remaining monthly expenses our family has. I currently have the following categories:

- monthly car (car payments, insurance premiums, gas)
- monthly groceries
- monthly home goods
- monthly entertainment
- monthly clothing
- savings
- investment


## Problem

problem: VERY TIME INTENSIVE -> can we automate?

## I wish

I had a script that I could run at certain intervals that would check my recent charges, extract the necessary information and record it to a CSV file.

After the script exists it can be run whenever and however often necessary to automate my manual entry process. I've got a bunch of dormant raspberry pis and I can easily set one up to run a CRON task every 5 minutes with this script. But that's thinking a little too far out. Let's build a MVP first, and then we can worry about it's production environment.

## Automation Research

First things first, let's get our ducks in a row. We generally know what we are trying to accomplish, but what data will I need, and where will I source that data from?

- what data do I need?
  - ongoing CC data
- how can I access the data?
  - ongoing CC data
    - manually checking my account data on the website
      - not great, manual, cannot be automated easily
      - however you can generate yearly reports as PDFs which the data can be extracted. Could be a candidate for grabbing previous years worth of expenses... but that's a problem for another day.
    - transaction alerts
        - seems to be a good choice
        - can set a threshold of any transaction more than 0.00 dollars and an email is sent to a specific email address.
        - can they be sent for all transactions?
        - can they go to an email address?
        - are the messages consistent?
            - yes they always come from the same email address
            - yes they always have the same subject
            - yes they always have the exact same structure
        - do the email messages contain all the data needed to track the expense?
            - time of charge
            - amount of expense
            - vendor
        - can emails be accessed in an automated fashion?
            - yes: Gmail offers a robust RESTful API that has some dedicated libraries, one of which I've worked with using Python.

## Gmail API Research

Now that I know that I can send emails about transaction alerts to my email account, I need to figure out just how I can work with the GMAIL API to access the data.

- generally how do the labels in Gmail work?
  - INBOX & UNREAD
- how do I connect a Python script to my Gmail account?
- how can I get all the emails in my account that are in my INBOX, UNREAD, are from Discover or Chase and have the subject "Transaction Alert"
- what data is available as a part of the email metadata?
  - Lots of headers including (From, To, Subject, Snippet, Time)
- how do I access the payload/body of the email message?

## MVP

It seems feasible that I can write a script in Python that will utilize the Gmail API to:
- check my gmail inbox for Transaction Alerts from both Chase and Discover
- extract the necessary information from each email
- write the transaction to a CSV
- remove the email from my inbox (by removing the INBOX label)
- remove the unread label from the message (by removing the UNREAD label)
- add the Auto-Finances/Recorded 
- add one of the: Auto-Finances/Chase/Transaction or Auto-Finances/Discover/Transaction labels